Improve doc on Observing Your Application with Prometheus, Grafana, and Jaeger (#3310)
ballerina-platform/ballerina-dev-website: learn/guides/observing-ballerina-programs/observing-your-application-with-prometheus-grafana-and-jaeger.md

---

## Observability
Observability consists of three major pillars.

### Metrics
Numeric values that are collected and aggregated over a period of time

### Tracing
The activities that occur when a request/transaction occurs in the system from the point of entry to exit.

### Logging
Text records of activities that occurred with relevant information along with the timestamp.

## Providing Observability in Ballerina

Metrics, distributed tracing, and logging are key methods that reveal the internal state of the system to provide observability. Ballerina becomes fully observable by exposing itself via these three methods to various external systems allowing metrics such as request count and response time statistics to be monitored, perform distributed tracing, and analyze logs.

Ballerina services and any client connectors are observable by default. HTTP/HTTPS and SQL client
connectors use semantic tags to make tracing and metrics monitoring more informative.

This guide focuses on enabling Ballerina service observability with some of its supported systems.
[Prometheus] and [Grafana] are used for metrics monitoring, and [Jaeger] is used for distributed tracing. 

> Ballerina logs can be fed to any external log monitoring system like the [Elastic Stack] to perform log monitoring and analysis.

Author: The link is added as a [reference](https://github.com/kaneeldias/ballerina-dev-website/blob/91c46050ba41a30cf30c337e8fc763ffbb2a0429/learn/guides/observing-ballerina-programs/observing-your-application-with-prometheus-grafana-and-jaeger.md?plain=1#L491) at the bottom of the page. When rendered, it works as expected

> Ballerina logs can be fed to any external log monitoring system like the [Elastic Stack] to perform log monitoring and analysis.

Reviewer: @kaneeldias - Then, why do we need the square brackets here in `[Elastic Stack]`?

> Ballerina logs can be fed to any external log monitoring system like the [Elastic Stack] to perform log monitoring and analysis.

Author: Since the link to Elastic Stack has been used in multiple places, it has been defined as a reference and used as above.

### Step 1 - Setting up the Prerequisites

> Make sure you have already installed [Docker](https://www.docker.com/) to set up external systems such as Jaeger,

Author: Fixed in 317c6fb

> Prometheus, etc. You can follow [Docker documentation](https://docs.docker.com/install/) to install Docker.

Author: Fixed in 317c6fb

### Step 4 - Observing the 'Hello World' Ballerina Service

By default, observability is not included in the executable created by Ballerina. It can be added
by using the `--observability-included` build flag or by adding the following section to the `Ballerina.toml` file.

```toml
[build-options]
observabilityIncluded=true
```

> >**Note:** the above configuration is by default included in the `Ballerina.toml` file generated when initiating a new 

Author: Fixed in 317c6fb

> > project using the `bal new` command. .

Author: Fixed in 317c6fb

```

The created configuration file can be passed to the Ballerina program with the `BAL_CONFIG_FILES` environment variable along with

> the path of the configuration file.  This is not necessary if the `Config.toml` file is present in the current working directory.

Author: Fixed in 317c6fb

$ BAL_CONFIG_FILES=<path-to-conf>/Config.toml nohup bal run --observability-included hello_world_service.bal > ballerina.log &
```

### Step 5 - Sending Requests
 

> Send requests to <http://localhost:9090/hello/sayHello>

Author: Fixed in 317c6fb

Example cURL command:

```bash
$ curl http://localhost:9090/hello/sayHello
```

### Step 6 - View Metrics and Tracing Dashboards

View the tracing information on Jaeger via <http://localhost:16686/> and view metrics information from the Grafana
dashboard on <http://localhost:3000/>.

> Sample view of Grafana dashboard for hello_world_service.bal is shown below.

Author: Fixed in 317c6fb

![Grafana Sample Dashboard](/learn/images/grafana-sample-hello-world-service-stats.png "Grafana HelloWorld Service Sample Dashboard")

Sample view of Jaeger dashboard for hello_world_service.bal is shown below. 
![Jaeger Sample Dashboard](/learn/images/jaeger-sample-dashboard.png "Jaeger Sample Dashboard")

### Step 7 - Visualizing the Logs
 

> If you have configured log analytics, the logs can be viewed in Kibana via <http://localhost:5601>

Author: Fixed in 317c6fb

### Setting Up the External Systems for Metrics
There are mainly two systems involved in collecting and visualizing the metrics. [Prometheus] is used to collect the

> metrics from the Ballerina service, while [Grafana] can be used to connect to Prometheus and visualize the metrics in the dashboard.

Author: Fixed in 317c6fb

#### Setting Up Prometheus
[Prometheus] is used as the monitoring system, which pulls out the metrics collected from the Ballerina service
`/metrics`. This section focuses on the quick installation of Prometheus with Docker and the configuration required to 

> collect metrics from the Ballerina service with default configurations. Follow the steps below to configure 

Author: Fixed in 317c6fb

Prometheus. 

> >**Tip:** There are many other ways to install the Prometheus and you can find possible options from the

Author: Fixed in 317c6fb

[installation guide](https://prometheus.io/docs/prometheus/latest/installation/).

1. Create a `prometheus.yml` file in the `/tmp/` directory.

> 2. Add the following content to `/tmp/prometheus.yml`.

Author: Fixed in 317c6fb

    ```yaml
    global:
      scrape_interval:     15s
      evaluation_interval: 15s
    
    scrape_configs:
      - job_name: 'prometheus'
        static_configs:
          - targets: ['a.b.c.d:9797']
    ```

>     Here the targets `'a.b.c.d:9797'` should contain the host and port of the `/metrics` service that's exposed from 

Author: Fixed in 317c6fb

1. Start Grafana as a Docker container with the command below.

    ```bash
    $ docker run -d --name=grafana -p 3000:3000 grafana/grafana
    ```
    For more information, go to [Grafana in Docker Hub](https://hub.docker.com/r/grafana/grafana/).

2. Go to <http://localhost:3000/> to access the Grafana dashboard running on Docker.

3. Log in to the dashboard with the default user, username: `admin` and password: `admin`

4. Add Prometheus as a data source with `Browser` access configuration as provided below.

    ![Grafana Prometheus Datasource](/learn/images/grafana-prometheus-datasource.png "Grafana Prometheus Datasource")

5. Import the Grafana dashboard designed to visualize Ballerina metrics from [https://grafana.com/dashboards/5841](https://grafana.com/dashboards/5841).
This dashboard consists of service and client invocation level metrics in near real-time view. 

>     Ballerina HTTP Service Metrics Dashboard Panel will be as below.

Author: Fixed in 317c6fb

#### Setting Up the Jaeger Server
There are many possible ways to deploy Jaeger. For more information, see [Deployment](https://www.jaegertracing.io/docs/deployment/). This focuses on an all-in-one deployment with Docker.

1. Install Jaeger via Docker and start the Docker container by executing the command below.

    ```bash
    $ docker run -d -p 13133:13133 -p 16686:16686 -p 55680:55680 jaegertracing/opentelemetry-all-in-one
    ```

2. Go to <http://localhost:16686> and load the web UI of the Jaeger to make sure it is functioning properly.

>     The image below is the sample tracing information you can see from Jaeger.

Author: Fixed in 317c6fb

    
    ![Jaeger Tracing Dashboard](/learn/images/jaeger-tracing-dashboard.png "Jaeger Tracing Dashboard")

## Distributed Logging

> In Ballerina, distributed logging and analysis is supported by Elastic Stack. Ballerina has a log module for logging to the console. In order to monitor the logs, the Ballerina standard output needs to be redirected to a file.

Author: Fixed in 317c6fb

3. Elasticsearch - Storage and indexing of the logs received by Logstash.
4. Kibana - Visualizes the data stored in Elasticsearch

Elasticsearch and Kibana are provided as [Cloud Services](https://www.elastic.co/cloud).
Alternatively, Docker containers can be used to set up Elasticsearch and Kibana as well.

1. Download the Docker images using the following commands.

    ```bash
    # Elasticsearch Image
    $ docker pull docker.elastic.co/elasticsearch/elasticsearch:6.5.1
    # Kibana Image
    $ docker pull docker.elastic.co/kibana/kibana:6.5.1
    # Filebeat Image
    $ docker pull docker.elastic.co/beats/filebeat:6.5.1
    # Logstash Image
    $ docker pull docker.elastic.co/logstash/logstash:6.5.1
    ```

2. Start Elasticsearch and Kibana containers by executing the following commands.

    ```bash
    $ docker run -p 9200:9200 -p 9300:9300 -it -h elasticsearch --name elasticsearch docker.elastic.co/elasticsearch/elasticsearch:6.5.1
    $ docker run -p 5601:5601 -h kibana --name kibana --link elasticsearch:elasticsearch docker.elastic.co/kibana/kibana:6.5.1
    ```
    

>     If you run on Linux you may have to increase the `vm.max_map_count` for the Elasticsearch container to start. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    If you are using Linux, you may have to increase the `vm.max_map_count` for the Elasticsearch container to start. 
```

Author: Fixed in 317c6fb

    Execute the following command to do that.
    
    ```bash
    $ sudo sysctl -w vm.max_map_count=262144
    ```

3. Create a `logstash.conf` file in the `/tmp/pipeline/` directory and include the following content in the file.

    ```
    input {
      beats {
        port => 5044
        }
    }
    filter {
      grok  {
        match => { "message" => "%{TIMESTAMP_ISO8601:date}%{SPACE}%{WORD:logLevel}%{SPACE}\[%{GREEDYDATA:module}\]%{SPACE}\-%{SPACE}%{GREEDYDATA:logMessage}"}
      }
    }
    output {
        elasticsearch {
            hosts => "elasticsearch:9200"
            index => "ballerina"
          document_type => "ballerina_logs"
        }
    }
    ```
    
    Here, the 3 stages are specified in the pipeline. Input is specified as beats and listens to port 5044. 

>     A grok filter is used to structure the Ballerina logs and the output is specified to push to Elasticsearch on

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    A Grok filter is used to structure the Ballerina logs and the output is specified to push to Elasticsearch on
```

Author: Fixed in 317c6fb

    `elasticsearch:9200`.

> 4. Start the Logstash container by the following command.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. Start the Logstash container by executing the following command.
```

Author: Fixed in 317c6fb
